Title: Executive Performance and Rewards Survey | Deloitte India
Publication Date: 8 Apr. 2024


     Limited functionality available
    
Deloitte’s Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Program brings together a multidisciplinary team of Deloitte leaders and subject matter specialists to help CFOs stay ahead in the face of growing challenges and demands.
Check out our latest reports on technology, sustainability, tax, financial services, consumer business, and more
Art of the possible
Empowering futures together: Uniting strengths, igniting success
Space exploration has always captivated the human imagination, pushing the boundaries of what we thought was impossible. Over the years, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) has steered a path of audacity and exploration, orchestrating a symphony of achievements that have captured the world's attention.
Global Capability Centers (GCCs) have transitioned from being cost drivers to strategic business enablers and value creators. At Deloitte, we have tailored our services portfolio to bring innovation, deliver value and lead the evolution of GCCs from resource centers to Centers of Excellence (CoEs).
This paper, based on our analysis of the responses, proposes key interventions for health care providers to increase engagement with consumers and prepare their organisations for the post-pandemic world.
We encourage jobseekers to exercise caution. 
Now in its 11th year, the survey finds Gen Zs and millennials are striving for balance and advocating for change.
Throughout the past year, Deloitte found new ways to maintain connections—the lifeblood of our organization—and developed measures to strengthen those connections, quantify our global impact and advance societal progress.
Deloitte India executive performance and rewards survey has been saved 
Deloitte India executive performance and rewards survey has been removed 
An Article Titled Deloitte India executive performance and rewards survey already exists in Saved items 

                                Article
                            
India provides insights into CEO and CXO compensation in India. It also explores the future of Executive Performance and Rewards, including key challenges and solutions for clients. The report analyzes CEO talent movement, global long-term incentives, and international case studies.

A particular focus is on the impact of IRDAI regulations on the insurance industry's remuneration practices. The report explores how insurers have adapted to these changes.

Given India's strong economic growth, the importance of resilient leadership is highlighted. The report explores how companies are attracting, retaining, and rewarding such leaders. It also examines the increasing linkage between CXO compensation and pay at risk, driven by stricter scrutiny from regulators and stakeholders.


 
To stay logged in, change your functional cookie settings.
OR
Social login not available on Microsoft Edge browser at this time.
OR
© 2023 Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP. See Terms of Use for more information.
 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India Private Limited (U74140MH199 5PTC093339) a private company limited by shares was converted into Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP, a limited liability partnership (LLP Identification No. AAE-8458) with effect from October 1, 2015.
 
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, a UK private company limited by guarantee (“DTTL”), its network of member firms, and their related entities. DTTL and each of its member firms are legally separate and independent entities. DTTL (also referred to as “Deloitte Global”) does not provide services to clients. Please see www.deloitte.com/about to learn more about our global network of member firms.
 
Click here to access Deloitte’s Global Principles of Business Conduct.
Click here to access an essential advisory for career aspirants.

© 2023 Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP. See Terms of Use for more information.
 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India Private Limited (U74140MH199 5PTC093339) a private company limited by shares was converted into Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP, a limited liability partnership (LLP Identification No. AAE-8458) with effect from October 1, 2015.
 
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, a UK private company limited by guarantee (“DTTL”), its network of member firms, and their related entities. DTTL and each of its member firms are legally separate and independent entities. DTTL (also referred to as “Deloitte Global”) does not provide services to clients. Please see www.deloitte.com/about to learn more about our global network of member firms.
 
Click here to access Deloitte’s Global Principles of Business Conduct.
Click here to access an essential advisory for career aspirants.